KEP-3370:  add native PodGroup api (#3371)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-scheduling/3370-native-podgroup-api/README.md

failure reasons in pod.status.condition to decide whether it's possible to resolve the failure 
by provisioning new machines. Details are described in the following.

## Design Details

### PodGroup API

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

Most batch jobs consist of multiple (usually two) roles of tasks. For example, a
typical Tensorflow job has some parameter servers and workers. Each role
requires a quorum to be ready to run. With that being considered, the following
API designs all employ a 2-tier specification (Subsets) inside PodGroup. 

The PodGroup API will be defined in group scheduling.k8s.io, like PriorityClass.

```go
// group scheduling.k8s.io
type PodGroup struct {
	Spec   PodGroupSpec
	Status PodGroupStatus
}

// PodGroupSpec is a description of a PodGroupSpec.
type PodGroupSpec struct {
	// Subsets consist of various kinds of pod sets.
	// A PodGroup is schedulable if all subsets can be scheduled.

> 	Subsets []Subset

Author: Have previously considered. But we need to distinguish between pod group and pod set. They may have the same meaning.

need to add a new PodGroup Controller in controller-manager.

```go
// PodGroupStatus represents the current state of a pod group.
type PodGroupStatus struct {
	// Represents the latest available observations of 
	// a pod group's current state.
	Conditions []PodGroupCondition

	// Subsets is a list of SubsetStatus which represents 
	// the current state of a single subset.
	Subsets []SubsetStatus
}

// PodGroupCondition describes the state of a pod group 
// at a certain point.
type PodGroupCondition struct {
	// Type of deployment condition.
	Type PodGroupConditionType

	// Status of the condition, one of True, False, Unknown.
	Status v1.ConditionStatus

	// The last time this condition was updated.
	LastUpdateTime metav1.Time

	// Last time the condition transitioned from one status to another.
	LastTransitionTime metav1.Time
	
	// The reason for the condition's last transition.
	Reason string
	
	// A human readable message indicating details about 
	// the transition.
	Message string
}

type PodGroupConditionType string

const (
	// PodGroupScheduled represents status of the scheduling 
	// process for this pod group.

> 	PodGroupScheduled PodGroupConditionType = "PodGroupScheduled"

Author: `PodGroupScheduled` represents the pod group is scheduled, not only means it's scheduled successfully. 

> And whether Scheduled enough rather than PodGroupScheduled since it's the status of PodGroupCondition.

`Scheduled` or `PodGroupScheduled` are both ok to me.

)

// SubsetStatus represents the current state of a subset.
type SubsetStatus struct {
	Name string

	// Total number of non-terminated pods targeted by this subset. (
	// their labels match the selector)
	Total int32

	// ScheduledAvailable is the number of pods in the subset that can be scheduled
	// successfully, but the scheduling fails because minMember cannot be met.

> 	ScheduledAvailable int32

Author: No. Not in kube-scheduler. It will be updated by pod-group-controller in kube-controller by the reconcile mechanism.
It will use `pod.condition.reason = CoschedulingNotMeetMinMember` to determine which class the pod belongs to.

> 	ScheduledAvailable int32

Reviewer: oh, so for each pod waiting on permit we will still send a pod update?

> 	ScheduledAvailable int32

Author: If the pod group times out, it needs to release the resources they are occupying. For this part of pod group which can be scheduled successfully, but the scheduling fails because minMember cannot be met. We need to update the pod.condition as `CoschedulingNotMeetMinMember ` in the func `handleSchedulingFailure`.

If they can meet the minMember, we don't need to update it.

	// Running is the number of pods targeted by this subset
	// with a Running phase.
	Running int32
}
```

### User workflow
1. The user creates a PodGroup object.
2. The user creates a workload (Deployment, Job, etc.) and associates .spec.podGroup to the previously created PodGroup name.
3. The user watched the status of PodGroup. Pods associated with this PodGroup are expected to be co-scheduled if resources are adequate.
4. The user waits for the PodGroup to be complete and then deletes it.

### Scheduler
#### QueueSort
In order to maximize the chance that the pods which belong to the same `PodGroup` to be scheduled consecutively, we need to implement a customized `QueueSort` plugin to sort the Pods properly.

Firstly, we will inherit the default in-tree PrioritySort plugin so as to honor .spec.priority to ensure high-priority Pods are always sorted ahead of low-priority ones.

Secondly, if two Pods hold the same priority, the sorting precedence is described as below:

- If they are both regularPods (without pod.spec.podGroup), compare their `InitialAttemptTimestamp` field: the Pod with earlier `InitialAttemptTimestamp` is positioned ahead of the other.
  

> - If one is regularPod and the other is pgPod (without pod.spec.podGroup), compare regularPod's `InitialAttemptTimestamp` with the `creationtime` of pgPod's PodGroup: the Pod with earlier timestamp is positioned ahead of the other.

Author: `WaitForFirstConsumer` is happened in the pre-bind phase., after the premit phase. Won't be affected by `gang scheduling` here.

> - If one is regularPod and the other is pgPod (without pod.spec.podGroup), compare regularPod's `InitialAttemptTimestamp` with the `creationtime` of pgPod's PodGroup: the Pod with earlier timestamp is positioned ahead of the other.

Author: Updated.

  
- If they are both pgPods:
  - Compare their pod group's `CreationTimestamp`: the Pod in pod group which has earlier timestamp is positioned ahead of the other.
  - If their `CreationTimestamp` is identical, order by their UID of PodGroup: a Pod with lexicographically greater UID is scheduled ahead of the other Pod. (The purpose is to tease different PodGroups with the same `CreationTimestamp` apart, while also keeping Pods belonging to the same PodGroup back-to-back)

#### PreFilter

> In PreFilter phase, we need to check if pod.spec.podGroup is nil firstly. If so, return success. If not, check if the pod group is existed in the scheduler internal cache and pod.spec.podGroup.subset is matched in pod group, if not, reject the pod in PreFilter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In PreFilter phase, we need to check if pod.spec.podGroup is nil firstly. If so, return success. If not, check if the pod group exists in the scheduler's internal cache and pod.spec.podGroup.subset is matched in pod group, if not, reject the pod in PreFilter.
```

#### Permit
In Permit phase, It is divided into two parts.

- The first part is that we put the pods that doesn't meet MinMember into the WaitingMap and reserve resources until MinMember are met or timeout is triggered.

   - Get the number of Running pods that belong to the same PodGroup
   - Get the number of WaitingPods (used to record pods in waiting status) that belong to the same PodGroup

  If pods in all the subsets meet `Running + WaitingPods + 1 >= MinMember(1 means the pod itself) `, approve the waiting pods that belong to the same PodGroup. Otherwise, put the pod into WaitingPods and set the timeout (the timeout comes from the ScheduleTimeoutSeconds in PodGroup.).

- Then second part is in order for pods belonging to the same PodGroup to be scheduled as a whole without being broken up, we will leverage the feature added https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/103383 to move pods of the same PodGroup back to internal scheduling activeQ instantly.

> #### UnReserve

Author: WaitForFirstConsumer is happened in the pre-bind phase., after the premit phase. Won't be affected by gang scheduling here.

> #### UnReserve

Reviewer 2: One limitation of the delayed volume binding is that it currently doesn't have the notion that a group of volumes would want to be provisioned together. So what could happen is you have a volume provisioned successfully for one pod, but then fails for the second. Or even if you have multiple volumes in a single pod. 

It would be interesting to explore if this could help address that use case too.

After a pod which belongs to a PodGroup times out in the permit phase. UnReserve Rejects the pods that belong to the same PodGroup to avoid long-term invalid reservation of resources. The rejected pod will have the different failure message in condition with other scheduled failed pods.

```go
  // These are reasons for a pod's transition to a condition.
  const (
    // PodReasonUnschedulable reason in PodScheduled PodCondition means that the scheduler
    // can't schedule the pod right now, for example due to insufficient resources in the cluster.
    PodReasonUnschedulable = "Unschedulable"

    // PodReasonCoschedulingNotMeetMinMember reason in PodScheduled PodCondition means 
    // that the pod can be scheduled successfully, but the scheduling fails because 
    // minMember cannot be met.
    PodReasonCoschedulingNotMeetMinMember = "CoschedulingNotMeetMinMember"
  )

  pod.status.conditions[*].reason = PodReasonCoschedulingNotMeetMinMember
```
### Cluster Autoscaler

> Cluster Autoscaler check the failure reasons in pod.status.condition to decide whether it's possible to resolve the failure by provisioning new machines. If the reason is `CoschedulingNotMeetMinMember`, CA don't need to provision new machines.

Author: It maybe like this in autoscaler: https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/6558beddd3d50c4653f45bad7958bf41e050f005/cluster-autoscaler/core/static_autoscaler.go#L405
We can filter the pods with `CoschedulingNotMeetMinMember` in autoscaler.

> Cluster Autoscaler check the failure reasons in pod.status.condition to decide whether it's possible to resolve the failure by provisioning new machines. If the reason is `CoschedulingNotMeetMinMember`, CA don't need to provision new machines.

Reviewer 3: Wouldn't filtering these pods cause them to wait for scale up indefinitely? CA should provision nodes to schedule the entire PodGroup if possible, but it quite unclear to me if it should provision partial resources: in some scenarios that might be desirable, e.g. when different Subsets require scaling up different NodeGroups (in which case multiple scale ups are required).

> Cluster Autoscaler check the failure reasons in pod.status.condition to decide whether it's possible to resolve the failure by provisioning new machines. If the reason is `CoschedulingNotMeetMinMember`, CA don't need to provision new machines.

Reviewer 4: A fool question, does CA support scaling up with specific NodePools now? As you said, I have particular resources requirements. @x13n

> Cluster Autoscaler check the failure reasons in pod.status.condition to decide whether it's possible to resolve the failure by provisioning new machines. If the reason is `CoschedulingNotMeetMinMember`, CA don't need to provision new machines.

Reviewer 3: NodePool is not a k8s concept. That being said, CA operates on NodeGroups, since most cloud providers implement such concept (e.g. nodepools in GKE). It is quite possible for nodes in one NodeGroup to have certain label specified, so let's say:
- `pod1` has nodeSelector `label1=value1`
- `pod2` has nodeSelector `label2=value2`
- nodes in `nodeGroup1` have `label1=value1`
- nodes in `nodeGroup2` have `label2=value2`

In each iteration, CA picks the best node group to scale up. In the scenario above, neither `nodeGroup1` nor `nodeGroup2` can satisfy both `pod1` and `pod2`, so 2 subsequent scale ups are required. If these pods belong to the same PodGroup, the resources for them need to be provisioned incrementally. Subsequent scheduling will follow all-or-nothing semantics, so it will wait for all scale ups to take place.

3. The user watched the status of PodGroup. Pods associated with this PodGroup are expected to be co-scheduled if resources are adequate.
4. The user waits for the PodGroup to be complete and then deletes it.

### Scheduler
#### QueueSort
In order to maximize the chance that the pods which belong to the same `PodGroup` to be scheduled consecutively, we need to implement a customized `QueueSort` plugin to sort the Pods properly.

Firstly, we will inherit the default in-tree PrioritySort plugin so as to honor .spec.priority to ensure high-priority Pods are always sorted ahead of low-priority ones.

Secondly, if two Pods hold the same priority, the sorting precedence is described as below:

- If they are both regularPods (without pod.spec.podGroup), compare their 
`InitialAttemptTimestamp` field: the Pod with earlier `InitialAttemptTimestamp` is positioned 
ahead of the other.
  
- If one is regularPod and the other is pgPod (with pod.spec.podGroup), compare regularPod's
`InitialAttemptTimestamp` with the `creationtime` of pgPod's PodGroup: the Pod with earlier 
timestamp is positioned ahead of the other.
  

> - If they are both pgPods:

Author: Yes. You are right. It is required in the first version. https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/scheduler-plugins/tree/master/kep/2-lightweight-coscheduling#podgroup
But it's hard to assure. I added a few notes for it.

  - Compare their pod group's `CreationTimestamp`: the Pod in pod group which has earlier timestamp is positioned ahead of the other.

>   - If their `CreationTimestamp` is identical, order by their UID of PodGroup: a Pod with lexicographically greater UID is scheduled ahead of the other Pod. (The purpose is to tease different PodGroups with the same `CreationTimestamp` apart, while also keeping Pods belonging to the same PodGroup back-to-back)

Author: Sorry. I don't get what you said is no sense? Can you give more details for it?

>   - If their `CreationTimestamp` is identical, order by their UID of PodGroup: a Pod with lexicographically greater UID is scheduled ahead of the other Pod. (The purpose is to tease different PodGroups with the same `CreationTimestamp` apart, while also keeping Pods belonging to the same PodGroup back-to-back)

Reviewer 4: Sorry, just forget my question, I used to think about whether we can reuse PodGroup like PriorityClass, but I just realized PodGroup is a stateful workload.

`InitialAttemptTimestamp` with the `creationtime` of pgPod's PodGroup: the Pod with earlier 
timestamp is positioned ahead of the other.
  
- If they are both pgPods:
  - Compare their pod group's `CreationTimestamp`: the Pod in pod group which has earlier timestamp is positioned ahead of the other.
  - If their `CreationTimestamp` is identical, order by their UID of PodGroup: a Pod with lexicographically greater UID is scheduled ahead of the other Pod. (The purpose is to tease different PodGroups with the same `CreationTimestamp` apart, while also keeping Pods belonging to the same PodGroup back-to-back)

#### PreFilter
In PreFilter phase, we need to check if pod.spec.podGroup is nil firstly. If so, return 
success. If not, check if the pod group exists in the scheduler's internal cache and pod.spec.
podGroup.subset is matched in pod group, if not, reject the pod in PreFilter.

#### Permit
In Permit phase, It is divided into two parts.

- The first part is that we put the pods that doesn't meet MinMember into the WaitingMap and reserve resources until MinMember are met or timeout is triggered.

>    - Get the number of Running pods that belong to the same PodGroup

Reviewer 4: Get by labelSelector? And where's the labelSelector located, in PodGroup level or SubSet level?

Reviewer 4: I ask this question for I find in `SubsetStatus`, we will get the pods by label selector too.

Author: Not use label selector, we add a filed called `podgroup` in pod.spec

   - Get the number of WaitingPods (used to record pods in waiting status) that belong to the same PodGroup

>   If pods in all the subsets meet `Running + WaitingPods + 1 >= MinMember(1 means the pod itself) `, approve the waiting pods that belong to the same PodGroup. Otherwise, put the pod into WaitingPods and set the timeout (the timeout comes from the ScheduleTimeoutSeconds in PodGroup.).

Reviewer 4: Just to confirm, the `ScheduleTimeoutSeconds` is the duration of  pod group, right?

Author: Yes. As the comments in api define

Lacking this "all-or-nothing" semantics can cause a workload to be partially
scheduled. This, from an application’s perspective, leads to an undetermined SLO
since the workload cannot be guaranteed to be ready within an expected period.
Sometimes it can be worse: workloads may be partially scheduled simultaneously to
reserve their resources and then cause deadlocks.

This "all-or-nothing" semantics, also known as coscheduling or gang-scheduling, 
is actually a typical requirement for batch (run-to-completion) workloads. We’re
proposing a fundamental Kubernetes PodGroup API to achieve this. This new API,
which served as a scheduling primitive, can be used along with other scheduling 
building blocks, to accommodate more workloads to run in Kubernetes natively and
effortlessly. Moreover, this enforced API will help achieve efficient cluster
utilization and ease users to define their application SLOs.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

- Define PodGroup API in Kubernetes (k/k)
- Enforce PodGroup as a scheduling primitive
- Manage the lifecycle of PodGroup

> - Compatible with autoscaler

Author: Done

Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

- Incompatibility with CA : The failure reason of some pods in a pod group is not that the
resources cannot be met, but that the podgroup cannot meet `all-or-nothing` of
gang-scheduling. But CA will provision machines for all pods. For this part of pods in pod 
group, we will add different failure message in condition.reason. Cluster Autoscaler check the
failure reasons in pod.status.condition to decide whether it's possible to resolve the failure 
by provisioning new machines. Details are described in the following.

- Short-time resource deadlock in the memory of kube-scheduler: base on the alpha version 
implementation of pod group scheduling, it may happen that two pod groups reserve some
resources at the same time. Neither of them can be successfully scheduled. This is different
from the kube-scheduler without group scheduling, where the reserved resources are released by
timeout. And with QueueSort and PodsToActivate mechanism, PodGroup can be scheduled as `units'

> in the kube-scheduler to minimize `Short-time resource deadlock in the memory` occurrence. 

Author: Done

	// occupied by the PodGroup will be released to avoid long-term resource waste.
	ScheduleTimeoutSeconds *int32
}

// Subset represents a collection of pods with the same role.
type Subset struct {
	// Name is used to distinguish pods with different roles in the
	// same pod group. Optional if there is only one subset in the 
	// pod group.
	Name string

	// MinMember specifies the minimum number of pods required for a 
	// subset to be operational.
	MinMember int32
}
```

We then need to associate a Pod with its target PodGroup. To prevent potential race conditions
between PodGroup create events and Pod add events, we choose to add a field called `PodGroup`
to the podSpec instead of `label selector` to declare which PodGroup and Subset the Pod
belongs to.

```go
// PodSpec is a description of a pod.
type PodSpec struct {
	...
	PodGroup PodGroupRef
	...
}

// PodGroupRef contains enough information to let you identify an owning
// pod group.
// - pod.spec.podGroup.name = foo
// - pod.spec.podGroup.subset = (bar/baz)
type PodGroupRef struct {
  // Name is the name of PodGroup.
  Name   string
  // Subset is the name of Subset.

>   Subset string

Author: Done

 will reconcile the status of pod group. The workload operator can watch the pod group status,
 for example, when a pod is deleted and the total running count is less than `MinMember`. The
 workload operator can determine if it needs to evict the whole group or just create a new pod.

### User workflow
1. The user creates a PodGroup object.
2. The user creates a workload (Deployment, Job, etc.) and associates .spec.podGroup to the previously created PodGroup name.
3. The user watched the status of PodGroup. Pods associated with this PodGroup are expected to be co-scheduled if resources are adequate.
4. The user waits for the PodGroup to be complete and then deletes it.

### Scheduler
#### QueueSort
In order to maximize the chance that the pods which belong to the same `PodGroup` to be scheduled consecutively, we need to implement a customized `QueueSort` plugin to sort the Pods properly.

Firstly, we will inherit the default in-tree PrioritySort plugin so as to honor .spec.priority to ensure high-priority Pods are always sorted ahead of low-priority ones.

Secondly, if two Pods hold the same priority, the sorting precedence is described as below:

> - If they are both regularPods (without pod.spec.podGroup), compare their 

Author: Done

`InitialAttemptTimestamp` field: the Pod with earlier `InitialAttemptTimestamp` is positioned 
ahead of the other.
  
- If one is regularPod and the other is pgPod (with pod.spec.podGroup), compare regularPod's
`InitialAttemptTimestamp` with the `creationtime` of pgPod's PodGroup: the Pod with earlier 
timestamp is positioned ahead of the other.
  
- If they are both pgPods:
  - Compare their pod group's `CreationTimestamp`: the Pod in pod group which has earlier timestamp is positioned ahead of the other.
  - If their `CreationTimestamp` is identical, order by their UID of PodGroup: a Pod with lexicographically greater UID is scheduled ahead of the other Pod. (The purpose is to tease different PodGroups with the same `CreationTimestamp` apart, while also keeping Pods belonging to the same PodGroup back-to-back)

#### PreFilter
In PreFilter phase, we need to check if pod.spec.podGroup is nil firstly. If so, return 
success. If not, check if the pod group exists in the scheduler's internal cache and pod.spec.

> podGroup.subset is matched in pod group, if not, reject the pod in PreFilter.

Reviewer 5: In PreFilter, it does some preliminary checks in the following sequences:

- If the pod doesn't carry `.spec.podGroup`, returns `Success` immediately. Optionally, plumb a key-value pair in CycleState so as to be leveraged in `Permit` phase later.
- If the pod carries `.spec.podGroup`, verify if the PodGroup exists or not:
  - If not, return `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable`.
  - If yes, verify if the quorum (MinMember) has been met. If met, return `Success`; otherwise return `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable`.

Author: Done

#### Permit

> In Permit phase, It is divided into two parts.

Reviewer 5: In Permit, it firstly leverages the pre-plumbed CycleState variable to quick return if it's a Pod not associated with any PodGroup.

Next, it counts the number of "cohorted" Pods that belong to the same PodGroup. Under the hood, it reads the scheduler framework's NodeInfos to include internally assumed/reserved Pods. The evalution formula is:

```
# of Running + Assumed Pods + 1 >= MinMember(1 means the pod itself)
```

- If the evaluation result is false, return `Wait` - which will hold the pod in the internal `waitingPodsMap`, and timed out based on the PodGroup's timeout setting. Meanwhile, proactively move the "cohorted" Pods back to the head of activeQ, so they can be retried immediately. This is a critical optimization to avoid potential deadlocks among PodGroups.
- If the evaluation result is true, iterate over its "cohorted" Pods to unhold them (as mentioned above, they where holded in the internal waitingPodsMap), and return `Success`.

Author: Done

Sometimes it can be worse: workloads may be partially scheduled simultaneously to
reserve their resources and then cause deadlocks.

This "all-or-nothing" semantics, also known as coscheduling or gang-scheduling, 
is actually a typical requirement for batch (run-to-completion) workloads. We’re
proposing a fundamental Kubernetes PodGroup API to achieve this. This new API,
which served as a scheduling primitive, can be used along with other scheduling 
building blocks, to accommodate more workloads to run in Kubernetes natively and
effortlessly. Moreover, this enforced API will help achieve efficient cluster
utilization and ease users to define their application SLOs.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

- Define PodGroup API in Kubernetes (k/k)
- Enforce PodGroup as a scheduling primitive
- Manage the lifecycle of PodGroup
- Compatible with CA (Cluster Autoscaler)

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

- Restrict the PodGroup implementation to a specific scheduler

> 

Reviewer 5: Let's add a bullet stating that PodGroup based preemption would be a non-gola for alpha implementation.

Author: Ok. Added it.

Reviewer 4: But maybe we could add this to risks if pods  with high priority in a PodGroup preempt successfully but finally released for some reasons.

// PodGroupRef contains enough information to let you identify an owning
// pod group.
// - pod.spec.podGroup.name = foo
// - pod.spec.podGroup.subset = (bar/baz)
type PodGroupRef struct {
	// Name is the name of PodGroup.
	Name   string
	// Subset is the name of Subset.
	Subset string
}
```

Pods in the same PodGroup with different priorities might lead to unintended behavior, 
so need to ensure Pods in the same PodGroup with the same priority.

In this design, a PodGroupStatus is needed to record the latest status. This
enables users to quickly know what’s going on with this PodGroup; also some
integrators can rely on it to make pending PodGroup schedulable. For this, we 
need to add a new PodGroup Controller in controller-manager.

```go
// PodGroupStatus represents the current state of a pod group.
type PodGroupStatus struct {
	// Represents the latest available observations of 
	// a pod group's current state.
	Conditions []PodGroupCondition

	// Subsets is a list of SubsetStatus which represents 
	// the current state of a single subset.
	Subsets []SubsetStatus
}

// PodGroupCondition describes the state of a pod group 
// at a certain point.
type PodGroupCondition struct {

> 	// Type of deployment condition.

Reviewer 4: s/deployment/podGroup/ ?

	
	// The reason for the condition's last transition.
	Reason string
	
	// A human readable message indicating details about 
	// the transition.
	Message string
}

type PodGroupConditionType string

const (
	// PodGroupScheduled represents status of the scheduling 
	// process for this pod group.
	PodGroupScheduled PodGroupConditionType = "PodGroupScheduled"
)

// SubsetStatus represents the current state of a subset.
type SubsetStatus struct {
	Name string

	// Total number of non-terminated pods targeted by this subset. (
	// their labels match the selector)
	Total int32

	// ScheduledAvailable is the number of pods in the subset that can be scheduled
	// successfully, but the scheduling fails because minMember cannot be met.
	ScheduledAvailable int32

	// ScheduledUnavailable is the number of pods in the subset that can't be 
	// scheduled successfully.
	ScheduledUnavailable int32

	// Running is the number of pods targeted by this subset
	// with a Running phase.
	Running int32
}
```

 After the pod group is scheduled for the first time, the condition `PodGroupScheduled` is
 added by the `pod-group-controller` in kube-controller-manager. Then `pod-group-controller`

>  will reconcile the status of pod group. The workload operator can watch the pod group status,

Reviewer 4: What about when we complete the pod group scheduling? We'll update the condition or just delete the podGroup by controller?

Reviewer 4: From below text`The user waits for the PodGroup to be complete and then deletes it.`, I guess the controller will not delete the podGroup automatically, should we add another condition type to indicate we finished the pod group scheduling? Like `Complete` as Job does?

Reviewer 4: Also, the condition for failure.

proposing a fundamental Kubernetes PodGroup API to achieve this. This new API,
which served as a scheduling primitive, can be used along with other scheduling 
building blocks, to accommodate more workloads to run in Kubernetes natively and
effortlessly. Moreover, this enforced API will help achieve efficient cluster
utilization and ease users to define their application SLOs.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

- Define PodGroup API in Kubernetes (k/k)
- Enforce PodGroup as a scheduling primitive
- Manage the lifecycle of PodGroup 

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

- Restrict the PodGroup implementation to a specific scheduler

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.

> -->

Reviewer 6: Why is this section missing?

Author: Added.

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

> As a batch workload user (e.g., MPI/TensorFlow/Spark), I want all tasks of a 

Author: Done

Job to be either started altogether; otherwise, don’t start any of them.

> #### Story 2

Author: rewrite this user story.

As a service workload user, I want to use PodGroup along with other scheduling
directives to compose a customized scheduling requirement - like, I want a
Deployment to run in the same topology (using PodAffinity) at the same time 
(using PodGroup); otherwise, don’t start any of them.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.

> -->

Author: I add the part of `incompatibility with CA` in it.
but what is the `deadlocks` here means?

> -->

Reviewer: depending on the implementation, we could end up in a situation where two groups are partially assigned resources, but neither of them is fully scheduled.

> -->

Author: Added.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

Most batch jobs consist of multiple (usually two) roles of tasks. For example, a
typical Tensorflow job has some parameter servers and workers. Each role
requires a quorum to be ready to run. With that being considered, the following
API designs all employ a 2-tier specification (Subsets) inside PodGroup. 

> The PodGroup API will be defined as a top-level API (in group scheduling.k8s.io, like PriorityClass) 

Reviewer 6: Not sure if top-level API has any meaning. Just stating the group should be enough.

Author: Updated.

```go
// group scheduling.k8s.io
type PodGroup struct {
	Spec   PodGroupSpec
	Status PodGroupStatus
}

// PodGroupSpec is a description of a PodGroupSpec.
type PodGroupSpec struct {
	// Subsets consist of various kinds of pod sets.
	// A PodGroup is schedulable if all subsets can be scheduled.
	Subsets []Subset

	// ScheduleTimeoutSeconds defines the timeout threshold to abort

> 	// an in-progress PodGroup-level scheduling attempt.

Reviewer 6: since when?
What happens when the timeout is reached?

Author: > since when?

Calculate the time from the first Pod in this PodGroup to get resources(assume the cache).

> What happens when the timeout is reached?

Free the resources occupied by PodGroup. Avoid long-term resource waste

Author: added.

	ScheduleTimeoutSeconds *int32
}

// Subset represents a collection of pods with the same role.
type Subset struct {
	// Name is used to distinguish pods with different roles in the
	// same pod group. Optional if there is only one subset in the 
	// pod group.
	Name string

	// MinMember specifies the minimum number of pods required for a 
	// subset to be operational.
	MinMember int32
}
```

> In order to associate a pod with its target PodGroup, we need to add a field call `PodGroup` in the podSpec to declare which PodGroup and Subset the pod belongs to.

Reviewer 5: Not having an explicit PodGroup field in pod spec is not feasible. Let's say a pod is intended to be managed by a PodGroup while not defining the PodGroup field, and if due to network or other issues, the scheduler is not aware of the (implicitly associated) PodGroup, the pod may bypass co-scheduling and get scheduled directly.

> In order to associate a pod with its target PodGroup, we need to add a field call `PodGroup` in the podSpec to declare which PodGroup and Subset the pod belongs to.

Reviewer: Network issues between which components? the scheduler and the api-server? If so, wouldn't that issue block all scheduling activities anyways?

> In order to associate a pod with its target PodGroup, we need to add a field call `PodGroup` in the podSpec to declare which PodGroup and Subset the pod belongs to.

Author: Let me give an example: We created the pod group and pods in a very short period of time. At this point it is difficult to ensure which one reaches the scheduler first. If a pod arrives first, the scheduler does not know if it belongs to a pod group or not. Then the pod will be scheduled directly without considering the gang scheduling.

> In order to associate a pod with its target PodGroup, we need to add a field call `PodGroup` in the podSpec to declare which PodGroup and Subset the pod belongs to.

Reviewer: can you add the reasoning to the KEP please

> In order to associate a pod with its target PodGroup, we need to add a field call `PodGroup` in the podSpec to declare which PodGroup and Subset the pod belongs to.

Author: Added. Thanks.

```go
// PodSpec is a description of a pod.
type PodSpec struct {
  ....
  PodGroup PodGroupSpec

> 	....

Reviewer 5: Could you format it properly? Same as L349~352.

Reviewer 7: there's prior art for this... it's similar to storageclass, which was added to storage.k8s.io, went through alpha → beta → ga, and was referenced from v1.PersistentVolumeClaim

Reviewer 5: btw: IIRC storageclass was hosted as a CRD in alpha, and moved to in-tree in beta. For PodGroup, it's better to reside in-tree since day 1.

}

// - pod.spec.podGroup.name = foo
// - pod.spec.podGroup.subset = (bar/baz)

> type PodGroupSpec struct {

Reviewer 6: maybe PodGroupRef would be better.

Author: sgtm.

  // Name is the name of PodGroup.
  Name   string
  // Subset is the name of PodGroup.
  Subset string
}
```

In this design, a PodGroupStatus is needed to record the latest status. This
enables users to quickly know what’s going on with this PodGroup; also some

> integrators (like ClusterAutoscaler) can rely on it to make pending PodGroup

Reviewer 6: You probably need to clarify when the status will be updated with respect to the Pod unschedulable condition (is this going to be updated if the PodGroup is not satisfied yet)?

Reviewer: also what happens if one of the pods gets deleted after the group was scheduled? There are likely cases where a pod (or more) getting deleted can be considered ok, and other cases where the whole group should be preempted.

Author: > You probably need to clarify when the status will be updated with respect to the Pod unschedulable condition (is this going to be updated if the PodGroup is not satisfied yet)?

Added in the scheduling part of implementation.

> also what happens if one of the pods gets deleted after the group was scheduled? There are likely cases where a pod (or more) getting deleted can be considered ok, and other cases where the whole group should be preempted.

According to the current use case, if one (or more) pods is deleted, the results are determined by the workload controller whether to continue or rebuild or mark a failure.

schedulable. For this, we need to add a new PodGroup Controller in
controller-manager.

```go
// PodGroupStatus represents the current state of a pod group.
type PodGroupStatus struct {
	// Represents the latest available observations of 
	// a pod group's current state.
	Conditions []PodGroupCondition

	// Subsets is a list of SubsetStatus which represents 
	// the current state of a single subset.
	Subsets []SubsetStatus
}

// PodGroupCondition describes the state of a pod group 
// at a certain point.
type PodGroupCondition struct {
	// Type of deployment condition.
	Type PodGroupConditionType

	// Status of the condition, one of True, False, Unknown.
	Status v1.ConditionStatus

	// The last time this condition was updated.
	LastUpdateTime metav1.Time

	// Last time the condition transitioned from one status to another.
	LastTransitionTime metav1.Time
	
	// The reason for the condition's last transition.
	Reason string
	
	// A human readable message indicating details about 
	// the transition.
	Message string
}

type PodGroupConditionType string

const (
	// PodGroupScheduled represents status of the scheduling 
	// process for this pod group.

> 	PodGroupScheduled PodGroupConditionType = "PodGroupScheduled"

Author: It is not constantly reconciled. After the podGroup is scheduled for the first time, the condition "PodGroupScheduled" is added. Then we just need to update the status message by reconcile.

> 	PodGroupScheduled PodGroupConditionType = "PodGroupScheduled"

Reviewer: we need to document those semantics: pods getting deleted, and in general number of scheduled pod falling below MinMember, after the group is scheduled; and whether or not we will support evicting the whole group when that happens.

> 	PodGroupScheduled PodGroupConditionType = "PodGroupScheduled"

Author: Added.

> and whether or not we will support evicting the whole group when that happens.

I think it all depends on the workload operator. If the total running count is less than `MinMember`. The
workload operator can determine if it needs to evict the whole group or just create a new pod.

)

// SubsetStatus represents the current state of a subset.
type SubsetStatus struct {
	Name string

	// Total number of non-terminated pods targeted by this subset. (
	// their labels match the selector)
	Total int32

	// ScheduledAvailable is the number of pods in the subset that can be scheduled
	// successfully, but the scheduling fails because minMember cannot be met.
	ScheduledAvailable int32

	// ScheduledAvailable is the number of pods in the subset that can't be 
	// scheduled successfully.
	ScheduledUnavailable int32

	// Running is the number of pods targeted by this subset
	// with a Running phase.
	Running int32

	// Succeeded is the number of pods targeted by this subset
	// with a Succeeded phase.
	Succeeded int32

	// Failed is the number of pods targeted by this subset
	// with a Failed phase.

> 	Failed int32

Reviewer 6: I don't think we should have this. The information more naturally belong to the specific workload resource (Job, Deployment, etc).

Author: Yeah. You are right. It depends different workload. Deleted Failed and Succeeded.

}
```

### User workflow
1. The user creates a PodGroup object.
2. The user creates a workload (Deployment, Job, etc.) and associates .spec.podGroup to the previously created PodGroup name.
3. The user watched the status of PodGroup. Pods associated with this PodGroup are expected to be co-scheduled if resources are adequate.
4. The user waits for the PodGroup to be complete and then deletes it.

> ### Implementation

Reviewer 5: @denkensk in this KEP, it's time to compose the implementation details :)

The implementation details are intentionally left for different schedulers. 

> In terms of Kubernetes default scheduler, we will reveal the details in ano

Reviewer 6: More importantly, I don't think we can accept this KEP without an implementation plan for kube-scheduler.

I can think of two high-level implementation approaches:
1. The one that the existing co-scheduling approach is using: Still take a decision for each pod, and hold them in the Wait phase. This needs clarification on what conditions kube-scheduler would set on pods and podgroup status and how cluster-autoscaler would use them.
2. Completely ignore the pods that reference a pod group. The scheduler and autoscaler take a decision on the pod group, not the pods. Only once the podgroup is satisfied and the resources are reserved, the scheduler starts actually scheduling the individual pods. This needs more details around minPods. Also, this implementation is closer to what kueue is doing, so we could potentially use the same API for both. And it's closer to bit.ly/k8s-reservations by @ahg-g. In a high throughput batch cluster, customers are concerned about every object creation. So reducing the number of objects is desirable. And this is my main concern with the k8s-reservations proposal as it is now too.

@MaciekPytel, which high level approach do you think is more appropriate for cluster-autoscaler?

> In terms of Kubernetes default scheduler, we will reveal the details in ano

Reviewer: Just echoing that we need a detailed implementation plan, this KEP can't move forward without it. I think we need to join forces and try to refine the reservations idea because I feel it will not only address the co-scheduling case, but other cases as well and likely to be more compatible with CA.

> In terms of Kubernetes default scheduler, we will reveal the details in ano

Reviewer 5: We do need to fill the implementation section as I commented in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3371#discussion_r893755404.

For the time being, approach 1 is more feasible, and will qualify the bar of an alpha feature. But I don't see a big difference of 1 vs. 2 in terms of the scheduler implementation. In approach 2, we still need to schedule pods one by one, we cannot take the "reservation" signal as guaranteed, right?

Regarding reservation, I understand this is a de-factor feature of batch scheduling, and also the prerequisite of implementing backfilling. However, I don't interpret it as a _blocker_ of coscheduling. I envision coscheduling a standalone feature, just like other scheduler plugins, and if someday an external controller (like kueue) or core k8s provides the semantics of reservation, it will improve the perf of coscheduling seamlessly/automatically.

> In terms of Kubernetes default scheduler, we will reveal the details in ano

Reviewer: > But I don't see a big difference of 1 vs. 2 in terms of the scheduler implementation.

The implementation is actually different; in the reservation proposal there are two object APIs, a Reservation object that is 1:1 with pods and a ReservationSet; The scheduler is only aware of the Reservation object and scheduling a reservation is like scheduling a single pod. 

A ReservationSet could have an all-or-nothing scheduling mode implemented by the ReservationSet controller by monitoring the individual Reservations of a ReservationSet and declare the set "scheduled" when the individual reservations are.

> In approach 2, we still need to schedule pods one by one, we cannot take the "reservation" signal as guaranteed, right?

not sure I follow your assumption, but reservations when scheduled are guaranteed just like normal pods getting scheduled now. When scheduling a pod that points to a reservation, it can only schedule if the reservation is already scheduled.

> However, I don't interpret it as a blocker of coscheduling. I envision coscheduling a standalone feature, just like other scheduler plugins, and if someday an external controller (like kueue) or core k8s provides the semantics of reservation, it will improve the perf of coscheduling seamlessly/automatically.

My concerns are twofold: 1) duplicate APIs, or more accurately multiple APIs with overlapping functionality; 2) compatibility with other mature infra built around k8s. 

Regarding concern 1: as you noted the concept of reservation is common in the batch world (it is also useful for other types of workloads), and it can address the co-scheduling case as discussed above. At first glance I don't think the proposed PodGroup API is sufficient to use as part of the reservation APIs, and so we are risking having duplicate/overlapping APIs in the future. 

Regarding concern 2, k8s is now at a different maturity stage than before, major infrastructure is built around it already serving significant customer base. I think the current stage of the co-scheduling plugin doesn't need to be in core k8s, it can continue to exist as is outside core without trouble (it only touches a single component, the scheduler, which already offer a modular way for adding this feature); I believe moving it to core needs more than "For the time being" approach :)

> In terms of Kubernetes default scheduler, we will reveal the details in ano

Author: > Regarding concern 1: as you noted the concept of reservation is common in the batch world (it is also useful for other types of workloads), and it can address the co-scheduling case as discussed above. At first glance I don't think the proposed PodGroup API is sufficient to use as part of the reservation APIs, and so we are risking having duplicate/overlapping APIs in the future.

Resource reservation is an important concept in the batch world, But gang scheduling is also an import feature in batch world (maybe more common than reservation) . reservation and gang scheduling are two completely separate feature, and it's not good to mix them together; I tend to give users atomic scheduling capabilities. And also PodGroup  API is not only be used in co-scheduling. It a primitive api for batch. It can be used in multiple phases like we want to support preemption between pod group. And also PodGroup Api is factual criteria in the community, so many project use this.

> Regarding concern 2, k8s is now at a different maturity stage than before, major infrastructure is built around it already serving significant customer base. I think the current stage of the co-scheduling plugin doesn't need to be in core k8s, it can continue to exist as is outside core without trouble (it only touches a single component, the scheduler, which already offer a modular way for adding this feature); I believe moving it to core needs more than "For the time being" approach :)

Maybe since 5 years ago, users have been expecting to have the ability to support gang scheduling in kubernetes. Many people have to use other schedulers(like volcano) or build their own scheduler. This creates a lot of extra work for the user. I think if we want to bring the batch users back to native kubernetes. Support for PodGroup and Gang scheduling will be the first step. I don't think pod groups will have any bad consequences for kubernetes. :)

> In terms of Kubernetes default scheduler, we will reveal the details in ano

Reviewer 6: >  I don't think pod groups will have any bad consequences for kubernetes.

Again, the major risk is multiple APIs with very similar functionality.

> In terms of Kubernetes default scheduler, we will reveal the details in ano

Author: > The implementation is actually different; in the reservation proposal there are two object APIs, a Reservation object that is 1:1 with pods and a ReservationSet; The scheduler is only aware of the Reservation object and scheduling a reservation is like scheduling a single pod.

> A ReservationSet could have an all-or-nothing scheduling mode implemented by the ReservationSet controller by monitoring the individual Reservations of a ReservationSet and declare the set "scheduled" when the individual reservations are.

> Again, the major risk is multiple APIs with very similar functionality.

IIUC, Reservation object is 1:1 with pod, right? scheduler will be aware of the reservation object other than ReservationSet. Here you still need something like PodGroup and Gang scheduling to avoid resource deadlocks between two different ReservationSet, right? 

ReservationSet as the top api, ReservationSet controller can create pod group and some reservation objects. I think there is no APIs with similar functionality. They can integrate together.

> In terms of Kubernetes default scheduler, we will reveal the details in ano

Reviewer 6: If there is going to be a ReservationSet API, I prefer that kube-scheduler also looks at it, and then there is no need for PodGroup. In other words, PodGroup and ReservationSet would be one object.

> In terms of Kubernetes default scheduler, we will reveal the details in ano

Reviewer 5: > If there is going to be a ReservationSet API, I prefer that kube-scheduler also looks at it, and then there is no need for PodGroup.

I disagree PodGroup API can be replaced by or is a subset of ReservationSet. PodGroup literally means: I want this group of pods to be co-scheduled together. In a live cluster, the group of pods may be scheduled immediately **without explicit pre-reserving** resources; or go through a few cycles to be eventually scheduled; or hanging due to resource shortage. It's not _mandatory_ to associate a Preservation with co-scheduling. It's optional.

In terms of Reservation, it doesn't need to involve PodGroup as well. Its semantics is to pre-reserve a chunk of resources and be consumed later. Its scope is much broader than 1:1 mapping with pods. In some batch system's design, it's associated with time. Like, reserve some resources to be used at 10:00 PM, which backfilling can take advantage of - if a workload doesn't have room to run, but can finish before 10:00 PM it's fine for that workload to grab reserved spot.

So my point is: Reservation is wider topic. It needs to be more thoughtfully discussed as it only involves almost all k8s components, and also should leverage some thoughts from traditional batch system.

> In terms of Kubernetes default scheduler, we will reveal the details in ano

Reviewer: I agree that to implement all-or-nothing over reservations we will need the scheduler to be aware of "ReservationSet", but that doesn't mean it needs to be implemented using the Permit interface. As discussed below, the main difference  is that whatever decision the scheduler makes with regards to reserved capacity will be reflected on the api-server, not only in the scheduler's memory.

>  I don't think pod groups will have any bad consequences for kubernetes even this stage :)

I think it does have bad consequences if there is no autoscaling support from the beginning because CA serves significant user base and it is the component used to provision most cores in the cloud. 

> I disagree PodGroup API can be replaced by or is a subset of ReservationSet. PodGroup literally means: I want this group of pods to be co-scheduled together. In a live cluster, the group of pods may be scheduled immediately without explicit pre-reserving resources; or go through a few cycles to be eventually scheduled; or hanging due to resource shortage. It's not mandatory to associate a Preservation with co-scheduling. It's optional.

One can look at it like this: PodGroup is conceptually a reservation, but the reservation is happening in the scheduler's memory. What makes this problematic in k8s is that the source of truth is an external component, the api-server, which makes it harder for autoscaling to be in sync with what the scheduler is intending to do. If we build all-or-nothing using actual reservations with decisions reflected in the api-server, then we get closer to defining a concrete API between the scheduler and autoscaler. 

>  Mixing with unfinalized design/impl of Reservation would deviate from this KEP's goal and make readers confusing.

I believe there is a legitimate argument that reservations as a wider concept can solve the all-or-nothing use case while being more compatible with autoscaling; so at the minimum we need to discuss this as an alternative.

@MaciekPytel from autoscaling perspective, what are your thoughts on the conceptual difference between PodGroup (as a scheduling primitive only) and Reservations (not necessarily as discussed in bit.ly/k8s-reservations, but as a way to define a more concrete API between the scheduler and autoscaling), which one is more feasible to support via CA and why.

> In terms of Kubernetes default scheduler, we will reveal the details in ano

Author: > As discussed below, the main difference is that whatever decision the scheduler makes with regards to reserved capacity will be reflected on the api-server, not only in the scheduler's memory.

> from autoscaling perspective, what are your thoughts on the conceptual difference between PodGroup (as a scheduling primitive only) and Reservations (not necessarily as discussed in bit.ly/k8s-reservations, but as a way to define a more concrete API between the scheduler and autoscaling), which one is more feasible to support via CA and why.

Thanks. For this difference, if it's necessary, we can reflect the pod group reserved capacity in the `PodGroup` object on the api-server other than only in the scheduler's memory. The problem we have discussed above can be simplified as How to integrate the scheduler and CA. I think It's not mix the feature for resource reserve and co-scheduling. So we have two choice for this, right?

- once a Pod failed, scheduler would give a failure message (in pod.status.conditions[*]) that CA can read it. I add this choice in the detail design, we can add a reason for scheduled failed call `CoschedulingNotMeetMinMember`.

- Use the `PodGroup` object to integrate the Scheduler and CA, CA can obtain the PodGroup object's spec and status info, CA can decide whether it's possible to resolve the failure by provisioning new machines. For this choice, it's same  as `ReservationSet`.

I am ok for this two choice.  @MaciekPytel  WDYT? I am not sure if it's ok for CA to be aware of `PodGroup` API.

> In terms of Kubernetes default scheduler, we will reveal the details in ano

Reviewer 5: > One can look at it like this: PodGroup is conceptually a reservation, but the reservation is happening in the scheduler's memory. What makes this problematic in k8s is that the source of truth is an external component, the api-server, which makes it harder for autoscaling to be in sync with what the scheduler is intending to do.

Essentially, based on this KEP, the implementation a PodGroup's reservation is the same as a single pod's reservation, which doesn't increase the complexity nor needs additional changes to scheduler framework. _If_ we are going to introduce Reservation API, that would change both core logic (assume) and all out-of-tree Reserve/Permit plugins - because based on current Reservation proposal, a Reservation means a chunk of resources are confirmed/secured across all k8s components, so the current in-memory assume/reservation logic is no longer needed.

In other words, if Reservation API gets a consensus, that might be a game-changer - not only PodGroup but also other bits need to be adapted. For now, we shouldn't treat it as a blocker of this KEP as we will still continue the current in-memory reservation mechanism.

> In terms of Kubernetes default scheduler, we will reveal the details in ano

Reviewer 8: From CA perspective the challenge is not fetching the PodGroup object, that should be fairly simple.

The problem is that while CA algorithm re-uses scheduler plugins, it works differently than scheduler and it makes stronger assumptions. In particular:
1. CA only runs Filters. The assumption is that Filters are enough to tell if a pod will be able to run on a node provided by CA or not.
2. While point 1 is just how CA happens to be implemented and could in principle be changed, CA uses a greedy binpacking algorithm (I described the details in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/105802#issuecomment-985776281). 
    * The fact that it's a greedy algorithm means that it assumes that we can make scheduling decisions one-pod-at-a-time.
    * The challenge is that in CA we're solving a different problem than scheduler - we're not just checking if a set of pods can run on a set of nodes, we're trying to find an optimal set of nodes that allows scheduling of all the pods. If at the end of binpacking we find out that one pod in podGroup cannot scheduler, it's not enough that we just "don't schedule" other pods. We have to look for a minimal set of nodes that allows to schedule all the other pods, most likely meaning that we have to start over the entire binpacking logic. We already face major scalability challenges around binpacking, adding arbitrary number of retries (if there are multiple podGroups) doesn't sound like something we can make work in a large cluster.

Because of the above, I think it will be very hard to implement co-scheduling directly in the scheduling cycle, the way that current co-scheduling plugin works. I think an approach that decouples co-scheduling multi-pod check from scheduling of individual pods is much more likely to work with autoscaler. Reservations seem like one possible way of achieving that (assuming minPods check is not part of "scheduling" individual reservation, but something we check separately). Some sort of approach where we "schedule" PodGroup as a whole and not do a check for each pod that is a member of the group (which is how I understand option 2 in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3371#discussion_r897103506) seems like another feasible approach.

> In terms of Kubernetes default scheduler, we will reveal the details in ano

Reviewer 8: @ahg-g I agree with your on [bit.ly/k8s-reservations](https://bit.ly/k8s-reservations) seems like an idea that will work. 

---

@Huang-Wei 
I think this is a different case from nominated pod. In pod preemption scenario the scheduler is effectively saying the pod will be able to schedule shortly and no action is required from CA (a scale-up may be needed later for pods that will be preempted, but those pods will schedule the scale-up normally once they go pending).
With co-scheduling the situation is different - consider an example with 4 pods that requests 1 cpu each and they use co-scheduling, while there are only 3 nodes with 1 cpu each in the cluster. The pods will never be able to schedule without CA intervention and the expected result should clearly be CA adding 1 more node to make the pods become schedulable. 

In order to trigger a correct scale-up, it's not enough for CA to ignore the pods or have a vague information that they're all pending, because of a co-scheduling constraint not being met. CA must be able to run a simulation that will show that adding _just_ 1 node will make all those pending pods schedulable.

---

Re: "BulkFilter" - I'm worried about scalability of this approach and CA. The whole point of CA simulation is to figure out what is the minimum number of nodes that are needed to schedule all the pods. We currently do it by adding nodes one-by-one until there is enough to schedule all the pending pods.
With "BulkFilter" we don't know how many "new nodes" we need to add to schedule all the pods. I'm guessing CA would need to call it in a loop with increasing number of "new nodes" until all the pods are scheduled? The problem is that means we need N separate binpacking runs to find that we need N new nodes. We can try to improve it by doing a binary search or similar, but that is still much more computationally expensive than the current algorithm.

> In terms of Kubernetes default scheduler, we will reveal the details in ano

Reviewer 5: @MaciekPytel Re: the similarity of nominated pod, I meant the case that we have enough resources, it's just the quorum not being met (like 3 pods out there, but we require 4), so in CA, it should just ignore the quorum-not-meet pods, and that info is specified by scheduler. Sorry if I didn't make it clear.

Re: the example you listed is exactly the real CA support for co-scheduling, and we do need to let CA be aware that only 1 additional node is needed to schedule all 4 pods.

Re: "BulkFilter", actually that's the cost to support co-scheduling, which IMO is inevitable. Even with reversation, every reservation needs to be simulated and then secured. After reading the pseudo-code in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/105802#issuecomment-985776281, I think the gap is how to pass  the "(temporary) internal assumed/reserved" (or equivalent) info from scheduler to CA. Say in the above example, 3 out of 4 don't need extra resources, so if CA knows it only needs to simulate the 4th pod, then it would be easier - all other logic can be intact.

> In terms of Kubernetes default scheduler, we will reveal the details in ano

Reviewer 3: Reservation can be scheduled incrementally until it is satisfied. In non-autoscaled cluster, it may be a case of waiting for existing pods to finish. With CA, that may mean multiple scale ups, potentially in different node groups.
